# NIP ? - Symbol Configuration Utility (CLI)

## Summary

```
    NIP: 11
    Layer: Application
    Title: Symbol Configuration Utility (CLI)
    Author: Bader Youssef <bader@iodlt.com>
    Discussions-To: #sig-client
    Comments-URI: https://github.com/nemtech/NIP/issues/35
    Status: Draft
    Type: Process
    Created: 2020-02-03
    License: MIT
```

## Introduction

The current configuration process of a Symbol blockchain leaves much to be desired. To configure a Symbol instance, there is either the option of using one of the many pre-configured Docker images, which does not work on all systems (ARM-based devices, older systems), or completely configuring from scratch.

A Symbol (peer) instance requires a series of steps that must be taken before it is able to be functional and launched:

- Symbol dependencies must be downloaded, compiled, and installed. This process can be quite time-consuming.

- A total of _19_ config files must be properly configured for a new chain instance. For joining an existing chain, the proper config for that chain (_e.g a testnet_) must be downloaded and placed in the correct path.

- Depending on the user's goals, they may wish to further configure their node's settings in [`config-node.properties`](https://github.com/nemtech/catapult-server/blob/master/resources/config-node.properties), e.g a philanthropic node setup.

- Load properly configured `config-extension` files based on node role: `DUAL`, `API`, or `PEER`.

- For developers, switching and testing different network configurations is often part of the daily workflow.

There is currently no streamlined, easily installable tool to accomplish the above. An attempt was made with [`cat-config-scripts`](https://github.com/IoDLT/cat-config-scripts/), but it does not offer a high level of functionality or portability.

This NIP solves this problem by offering a CLI utility that streamlines the above into an easy-to-use tool.

## Feature Prioritization / Future Features

Certain features will be more prioritized than others.

The most notable issues as of this NIP are with the configuration of a node, node role switching, and loading other network configurations. These features are to be considered priority in this NIP. This [repository](https://github.com/nemfoundation/testnet-config) here demonstrates some of this functionality.

Other features, such as the portable compilation / installation of Symbol and its dependencies and generating new network templates are more complex and will come at a later time. However, they will be considered for the future of the CLI, and if other contributors get involved.

Future feature ideas are welcome in the comments of this NIP.

## Specification

### Additional Configuration File

For more advanced configuration, an optional `scu-config.json` can be passed into the CLI as an argument. This file would contain user-related values:

- Boot private key
- Harvester key
- Node name
- Node max fee
- An array of paths that lead to different network templates (`registeredTemplates`).
- an "active" path, which points to the current network configuration that the user is using (`selectedTemplate`).

#### scu-config.json

```json
{
  "friendlyName": "",
  "bootPrivateKey": "",
  "harvesterKey": "",
  "maxFee": 0,
  "selectedTemplate": "/usr/local/scu-cli/templates/tesnet",
  "registeredTemplates": [other paths...]
}
```

The user would have the option of editing this file themselves, or changing the values via the CLI.

### Command Layout Outline

The following is a proposed command tree for the CLI. Each command should contain a parent command, along with required parameters.

#### Command Table

| **Subcommand** | **Args**               | **Description**                                                                                                                              |
| -------------- | ---------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `install*`     | `<path-to-new-config>` | Installs Symbol and its dependencies.                                                                                                        |
| `start`        | none                   | Starts a Symbol instance with the selected network template. This will most likely depend on the Symbol binaries being in the user's `PATH`. |
| `add`          | none                   | Adds a new network template.                                                                                                                 |
| `select`       | `<template-name>`      | Selects a saved network template.                                                                                                            |
| `reset`        | none                   | Resets the selected node.                                                                                                                    |
| `changerole`   | `<dual / peer / api>` | Changes the node role of the selected network template.                                                                                      |
| `configure`    | `<config-parameter>`   | Changes node-specific parameter in selected network template (e.g bootPrivateKey).                                                           |

---

Example `--help` output:

```
$ scu-cli --help
Welcome to the Symbol Configuration Utility

USAGE: scu-cli <command>

SUBCOMMANDS:

install* - Installs Symbol and its dependencies.

start - Starts a Symbol instance with the selected network template. This will most likely depend on the Symbol binaries being in the user's PATH.

add <path-to-new-config> - Adds a new network template.

select <template-name> - Selects a saved network template.

reset - Resets the selected node.

changerole <dual | peer | api> - Changes the node role of the selected network template.

configure - Changes node-specific parameter in selected network template (e.g bootPrivateKey).
```

`*` Will most likely not be implemented in the first version(s) of the CLI.

### Network Template Specification

The notion of network "templates" exists within [`cat-config-scripts`](https://github.com/IoDLT/cat-config-scripts/). A user should be able to download the resources and nemesis for a specific network as a "template", and specify the path to this template in the configuration file, or via the CLI. A template should follow the following file structure:

```
example-network-template/
.
├── seed
├── data
└── resources
```

Where `data/` contains the active directory for the node to store new chain information, `seed/` contains original nemesis data in the case of a node reset, and `resources` contains network-specific files. Users will be able to download network configurations in this format, and load them via the CLI.

These files are required to start and join a Symbol instance.

### Install Method

As the CLI will use Typescript / NodeJS, it will be published as an NPM package, and thus installation is the same as any NPM global module: `npm i -g scu-cli`.

## Motivation

This NIP intends to help with the testing and development of Symbol. By providing a standard tool that enables developers to easily switch configurations, install dependencies, and provide a better Symbol devops and configuration experience.

## Design Decisions

- The form of a cross-platform, CLI application makes the most sense for chain configuration. GUI applications cannot always be used in remote server configuration, and bash scripts can be cumbersome.

- The Symbol Configuration Utility will be written in Typescript and use the [Command Design Pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command_pattern). This pattern suits CLI-style applications very well, as it allows for the command logic to be encapsulated for later use depending on the program's state.

- It will be published as an NPM module to be installed globally on the user's machine. This will allow for easy installation.

- It's possible that this implementation could be integrated into `nem2-cli` - see [Alternatives](#Alternatives)

## Implementation

N/A at the time of the initial draft. Once more feedback and community input is gathered, a Github repo will be hosted with the code. It's possible that this functionality will be added to `nem2-cli`.

## Drawbacks

- It may cause redundancy with the existing `nem2-cli`, and the efforts between this CLI and `nem2-cli` may be split. It may also be a minor inconvenience, as developers will have to download two different tools.

## Alternatives

- Integration of the above features could be integrated into the existing [`nem2-cli`](https://github.com/nemtech/nem2-cli), which also happens to use the same software design pattern as proposed above.

  In this case, the functionality will implemented as part of a new subcommand: `node`.

  This approach may save time in development, as well as further existing tools in the ecosystem.

## References

- [catapult-server](https://github.com/nemtech/catapult-server)
- [cat-config-scripts](https://github.com/IoDLT/cat-config-scripts/)
- [nem2-cli](https://github.com/nemtech/nem2-cli)
- [testnet-config (node config script)](https://github.com/nemfoundation/testnet-config)

## History

| **Date**   | **Version**   |
| ---------- | ------------- |
| Feb 3 2020 | Initial Draft |
