# NIP 12 - Rebranding

```
    NIP: 12
    Title: Rebranding
    Author: David Garcia <david@nem.foundation>
    Discussions-To: https://github.com/nemtech/NIP/issues/38
    Comments-URI: https://github.com/nemtech/NIP/issues/38
    Status: Draft
    Type: Process
    Created: 2020-02-10
    License: MIT
```

## Introduction

The Migration Steering Committee has conducted the process of creating a [new brand](https://forum.nem.io/c/catapult-branding) for Catapult. The new brand "Symbol from NEM" has been [supported by the community](https://explorer.nemtool.com/#/poll?id=5e2eaab5328dc579fdadcef3) together with the ticker [XYM](https://explorer.nemtool.com/#/poll?id=5e2eaab5328dc579fdadcef3).

The objective of this NIP is to coordinate efforts to rename all repositories under the nemtech organization on GitHub.

## Specification

### Packages

The names of the repositories, URLs, and installable packages names will be edited as follows:

| Previous   | New        |
|------------|------------|
| nem2-*     | symbol-*   |
| catapult-* | symbol-*   |
| Catapult   | Symbol     |

At this moment, there are no plans to remove ``catapult`` internal references from ``catapult-server``  nor ``catapult-rest`` code.

All ``nem2-*`` related packages will be removed from ``npmjs`` and ``maven`` to prevent users installing and old version of the package by mistake.

### Organization

All the repositories within the ``nemtech`` organization will be [transfered](https://help.github.com/en/github/administering-a-repository/transferring-a-repository) to the new ``symbolplatform`` organization.

The ``nemtech`` GitHub organization will keep a link in the description to the new organization.

### GitHub Pages

The ``nemtech`` organization will preserve the repository ``nemtech.github.io`` to redirect GitHub pages related links (e.g. nem2-docs, SDK references, nem2-openapi) to the new organization URL ``https://developer.<domain_chosen>.<extension>``.

### Ticker

Hardcoded references to ``nem.xem`` have to be replaced for ``symbol.xym``. For private networks default network currency, ``cat.currency`` will still be used.

### CI

Some external services might need to be reconfigured manually per repository, including:

* TravisCI
* Coveralls

Each sig organizer should give priority to add again the services required to merge new PRs into master (e.g., testing pipelines) before adding new features to each project.

### Redesign

If necessary, adapt colors, fonts, and logo accordingly to the latest [brand update](https://forum.nem.io/t/symbol-brand-update/24305).

It is recommended that each repository creates a separate branch to start applying the redesign without interfering with other incoming features.

## Design Decisions

The specification proposed tries to minimize 404 errors when accessing to old links. 

The links of the repositories moved to the new organization are automatically redirected to the new location (except for GitHub pages). The time the redirections are active might change, since it is managed by GitHub.

To solve the GitHub pages redirection, we will keep the ``nemtech.github.io`` within the ``nemtech`` organization and develop a custom ``.js`` script to redirect to each new URL accordingly.

## Implementation

For each project, a new issue named "Rebranding" will be created with the following tasks list:

    * [ ] Rebranding branch created
    * [ ] New design applied (font, logos, colors)
    * [ ] Codename references renamed
    * [ ] Ticker references renamed
    * [ ] Links reviewed
    * [ ] README reviewed
    * [ ] PR created
    * [ ] Package renamed
    * [ ] Package deployed/tag created

### Milestone 1

Target repositories:

* [x] nem2-sdk-typescript-javascript
* [x] nem2-openapi
* [x] nemstudios/nem2-open-api-generator (migrated GitHub & npm nemtech org)
* [x] nemstudios/catbuffer-generator (migrated to npm nemtech org)
* [x] nem2-sdk-java

### Milestone 2

Target repositories:

* [x] nem2-docs
* [x] nem2-cli
* [x] nemfoundation/symbol-desktop-wallet-beta
* [x] nemfoundation/nem2-explorer

### Milestone 3

Target repositories:

* [ ] catapult-service-bootstrap
* [ ] catapult-whitepaper
* [ ] nem2-e2e-tests
* [ ] nem2-scenarios
* [x] nemfoundation/nem2-uri-scheme
* [ ] nemfoundation/nem2-hd-wallets
* [ ] nemfoundation/nem2-qrlibrary

### Milestone 4

Target repositories:

* [ ] catapult-server
* [ ] catapult-rest
* [ ] catbuffer

### Milestone 5 (under discussion)

* [ ] symbolplatform GitHub org created
* [ ] core devs asigned as owners of the org
* [ ] domain redirected to the org
* [ ] script to redirect nemtech.github.io links
* [ ] repositories migrated
* [ ] CI services migrated 

## Backwards Compatibility

By approving this proposal, it is assumed that:

- It will not be possible to migrate every link.
- It might penalize the project's SEO.

Nevertheless, it is preferable in the long term to have consistent branding, and to apply those changes sooner than later will cause fewer redirections in the future.

## Alternatives

Other alternatives are being considered:

- Keep all the repositories under ``nemtech`` (without renaming the org) to avoid redirections.

The rationale of having a GitHub org for NIS1 (NEMProject) and another for Catapult (nemtech) was to have a clear way to separate the repositories by technology to avoid confusion. If not, every Catapult repo would be under the NEMProject. However, the names chosen are not descriptive enough to differentiate the content of both orgs.

- Rename the ``nemtech`` org to ``symbolplatform``, and create a new org named ``nemtech`` to handle redirections

There is the risk to loose the ``nemtech`` name forever since this will be available for everyone to register.

- Not renaming ``catapult-server`` and ``catapult-rest`` to ``symbol-server`` and ``symbol-rest``.

## References

* [Catapult brand updates](https://forum.nem.io/t/catapult-brand-update-1/23875/)
* [Transferring a repository](https://help.github.com/en/github/administering-a-repository/transferring-a-repository)
* [Transferring organization ownership](https://help.github.com/en/github/setting-up-and-managing-organizations-and-teams/transferring-organization-ownership)

## History

| **Date**      | **Version**   |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| Feb 10 2020   | 1.0           |
