# NIP 9 - New Persistent Delegation Request Transaction

```
    NIP: 9
    Layer: Core | SDK | Library
    Title: New Persistent Delegation Request Transaction
    Author: gimre <g.imre@protonmail.com>
    Discussions-To: https://github.com/nemtech/NIP/issues/33
    Comments-URI: https://github.com/nemtech/NIP/issues/33
    Status: Active
    Type: Informational
    Created: 2019-01-24
    License: MIT
```

## Introduction

Pentesting team has identified potential issues in persistent delegation request:
 * ad-hoc key derivation scheme
 * key sharing between asymmetric signature and encryption systems

We confirmed both claims, key derivation was indeed an ad-hoc choice.
Sharing keys is also bad practice.

This NIP and related server changes fixes both issues.

## Specification

### Short summary of changes

1. The message marker is changed from `FE` `CC71C764BFE598` to `FE` `2A8061577301E2`
2. The format of attached message is `| marker | ephemeral public key | encrypted harvester data |`
  * the format of `encrypted harvester key` is as earlier `| initialization vector | encrypted harvester key | Pkcs7 padding |`
3. The process of deriving a key is changed (generation of ephemeral key)
4. The key derivation function is changed to HKDF-HMAC-Sha256

### Key derivation outline

Let's assume account _A_ wants to send to node _N_ (identified by public key `N_pub`) delegation request transaction with attached harvester private key _HPK_.
Node 

_A_:
1. generates ephemeral key pair (`E_priv`, `E_pub`)
2. derives "shared secret" from `E_priv`, and `N_pub`
3. derives shared key `SK` - by passing "shared secret" into HKDF
4. generates initialization vector `IV`
5. uses `SK` and `IV` to encode _HPK_ with AES in CBC mode
6. creates transfer in format specified earlier `| marker | E_pub | encrypted data |`

Note, that both steps 1 and 4 should use true random source.

### Shared secret derivation

"Shared secret" deriviation is the same as before, the only difference is that on
 * senders side, ephemeral private key is used
 * recipient side, attached ephemeral public key is used for derivation

so for example in case of JS (and skipping details):
```js
	const d = prepareForScalarMult(ephemeralPrivateKey, hashfunc, signSchema);
	c.unpack(q, nodePublicKey);
	c.scalarmult(p, q, d);
	
	// sharedSecret = pack(p = d (derived from private key) * q (derived from public key))
	const sharedSecret = new Uint8Array(Key_Size);
	c.pack(sharedKey, p);
```

#### Shared key derivation

Shared key derivation is simply HKDF-HMAC-SHA256.
Test cases are provided in [RFC5869](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5869)
(note, that the rfc in test cases mentions SHA256, but it really means HMAC-Sha256)

so for example in cae of JS
```js
	const sharedKey = new Uint8Array(Key_Size);
	const salt = new Uint8Array(32);
	const info = 'catapult';
	const hash = 'SHA-256';

	const sharedKey = hkdf(sharedSecret, 32, { salt, info, hash });
```

## Design Decisions

The scheme outlined above follows [ECIES](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrated_Encryption_Scheme) scheme.
The usage of ephemeral key unties usage of _A_ key in asymmetric context from encryption.
HKDF is well known function used to derive keys from high-entropy sources.

## Implementation

Server part of the changes is already available inside catapult-server repository.

Proper test vectors will be provided inside [test-vectors](https://github.com/nemtech/test-vectors) repository.


## Backwards compatibility

Old marker (`FE` `CC71C764BFE598`) and data in old format will not be supported since next build after 0.9.2.1.

The changes obviously are not backward compatible.

## Alternatives

Alternative KDF construction considered was usage of one-step key derivation function using KMAC, as defined in
[NIST Special Publication 800-56C rev 1](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-56Cr1.pdf).
The idea was abandoned, because of poor adaptation in other programming languages.


## References

* [catapult-server](https://github.com/nemtech/catapult-server/)

## History

| **Date**      | **Version**   |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| Jan 24 2020   | 1.0           |

