# NIP 5 - Wallet as browser extension

## Summary

```
    NIP: 5
    Title: Wallet as browser extension
    Author: Aleix Morgadas
    Discussions-To: #sig-client
    Comments-URI: https://github.com/nemtech/NIP/issues/13
    Status: Draft
    Type: Standards Track
    Layer: Application
    Created: 2019-04-09
    License: MIT
    License-Code: GPLv3
```

## Abstract

A Wallet as Browser Extension, for Firefox and Chrome potentially, focused on user essential features and web-application integration. The mission is to bring to NEM web-applications the power of an integrated wallet browser meanwhile helping the user manage their assets.

## Specification

No specification/architecture as an application.

## Motivation

Two main motivations.

1. A multi-platform wallet.

The need of a wallet as a browser extension solves the multi-platform support, Linux, Windows and Mac are supported. Being a browser extension helps the newcomer to onboard on NEM smoothly. Instead of asking the user to install a full application, we just add a new button on their browser.

2. nem2 web application integration.

Unleashing the true nem2 potential on the web applications. Using the [Transaction URI Scheme](https://github.com/nemtech/NIP/pull/7) as driver for this feature, nem2-wallet-browserextension allows the nem2 web-applications to perform awesome features meanwhile delegating all the wallet, assets, namespaces, etc to the wallet.

For the nem ecosystem, that implies that the users just need to learn how to use the nem2-wallet and a nem2-web-application once and they will know how to use them all.

## Design Decisions

Technologies used:

- Vue framework
- nem2-sdk

For testing:

- jest

Rules/principles:

- Simplicity as design
- YAGNI

Open Source approach:

- Inclusive project
- Pull-Request based
- Optimistic pull-request approval

## Implementation

The implementation can be found [here](https://github.com/aleixmorgadas/nem2-wallet-browserextension) until the repository is not transferred into `nemtech`.

## Drawbacks

We are not sure about Browser security. In order to be the wallet ready for production, the project needs support for:

- Browser Extension stability. Not all browsers support the browser extension specification. It might happen that some browsers experience a different behaviour or no compatibility to some features the wallet provides on other browsers.
- Hardware Wallet integration, like [Trezor](https://trezor.io/) and [Ledger](https://www.ledger.com/).
- UI/UX it's done by a motivated community but not experts on the field. The experience might not be as good as expected.
- Browser security. It's being done by motivated developers by the community but without the proper investment on security.


## History

| **Date**      | **Version**   |
| ------------- | ------------- |
| April 9 2019    | Initial Draft |
